(mysterious instrumental music)
Lynne Kitei was enjoying a very successful career
as a medical doctor and as a chief medical consultant
for the Wellness Center at the Arizona Heart Institute.
Throughout her career, she was also regularly featured
in television and radio programs as an educator
in her field, but one day,
while looking out the window of her North Phoenix home,
an unexpected phenomena entered her life.
She noticed something on the horizon and began taking photos
that could not be explained.
Alert to the fact that something unusual was occurring,
Lynne had the photos analyzed,
and began asking questions of all the right authorities
in what was to become known
as one of the most celebrated UFO sightings in history,
the Phoenix Lights.
The result of her inquiry
is one of the best documented case histories of this event,
which is captured in her book and documentary
by the same title, The Phoenix Lights.
Dr. Lynne, for those people
who have not already heard about,
and if they have been fully versed in the subject
of the Phoenix Lights, let's just lay the foundation
with what happened on the night of March 13th, 1997.
On March 13th, 1997, while thousands of people
were out actually looking up at the sky for a glimpse
of the Hale-Bopp Comet, they also caught a glimpse
of a mile to two-mile wide formation of these lights.
Some people would say they were orbs,
others would say they were canisters of swimming light
when they went right over their head,
gliding, very low altitude, silently
across the entire state.
Actually, it went mainly through the most populated corridor
of Arizona, although, we have reports
as early as 5:20 PM
to as late as 5:30 the next morning,
when I was told by a crew from Boeing
that they actually saw this phenomena appear by the airport.
So there were many hours of these phenomena
and many things going on, actually.
Not just one or two events,
as you probably heard in the media,
but many events.
There actually is a compilation 12 years in the making
that we call the GAP,
Geospatial Animation Project,
from reports, hundreds of reports,
from the UFO Reporting Center in Seattle, Washington,
to Councilwoman Frances Barwood at the time,
as well as to (mumbles), which was a clearing house
of the Phoenix Lights information during that period,
as well as Arizona MUFON,
and from multiple witness reports,
there were actually about nine different kinds of craft
that people saw traversing throughout the state,
in addition to orbs separate from the craft,
or these orbs would detach from the main object,
go out into the environment, and then re-dock with it,
so there were many things going on
during the March 13th incident
that make it one of the most important
and most documented mass sightings--
Certainly most witnessed.
Isn't it considered to be the most witnessed
of all UFO sightings?
Absolutely, at this point,
it's probably well over 10,000 people saw it
throughout the state and we're talking people
from all walks of life, and again, many people were outside.
It was a beautiful, clear night,
and looking purposely at the sky.
So whoever did this, seemed to want to be seen,
and it was a very non-threatening, gentle way
of just gliding, in fact, some people
even had messages, telepathic messages.
"Don't worry, we're not here to hurt you,"
and felt very safe.
That was one point that really got to me as a physician,
when I started looking into the data,
and started interviewing the witnesses,
is that across the board, no one,
no one was fearful.
If anything, people were joyful
and "Oh my goodness, this is miraculous!"
and that was consistently the reaction in real time
and actually long term.
I did a study of witnesses that actually
came to me and said that they had had near-death experiences
as children that was reawakened by the mass sighting,
and I found that really curious 'cause I did, too.
And I thought, jeez, could there possibly be a connection
between all unexplained phenomena,
be it near-death experience, out of body experience,
unexplained aerial phenomena that have a mystical light
associated with the experience.
Lo and behold, when I started looking,
and I really did a meticulous investigation
to try to find a logical explanation
for not only the mass sighting
and what I saw up close and personal,
but also, this really took me on a new road.
I found that university studies, the Omega Project
at University of Connecticut, Kenneth Ring,
Dr. Kenneth Ring, as well as Dr. Sue Atuemblo
and Bruce Greyson, Dr. Bruce Greyson,
and many studies were being done,
Ray Fowler, Dr. Ray Fowler as well,
on the poignant connection,
not only in the experience itself,
but was most profound to me,
and I was hearing it over and over again,
certainly from the Phoenix Lights witnesses,
was the profound positive aftereffect
that happened within an individual who truly experienced
what I started calling an UP, unexplained phenomena,
U-P, an UP, because they are an UP.
The awakenedness, the enlightenment that happens
within an individual,
connectiveness to the universe, and to the earth
and to each other that is felt to the core.
It really does change people forever
once they have an UP experience.
And I just interviewed Raymond Moody,
and this is the same thing he talks about
as this quality of light and this quality of love
that seems to permeate all those experiences
that seem to be, as you say,
there are these crossover effects,
whether it's a near-death experience,
out of body experience or contact of this nature,
it seems that there are these truths
that ring through all of these, and for you,
what I found really interesting in reading your book
is there were some precursors to this event
that were setting the stage for you
because you did not come into this,
you were reluctant to come and take on this subject.
Ufology was not your thing, and yet at the same time,
you'd had some pretty profound things
that had happened to you, and one of them,
if you would start with, was on your birthday eve,
two years prior to the sighting,
you had another profound event and it was shared.
Yes, I have asked myself and done a lot of soul searching,
asking if there is a connection
not only in other unexplained phenomena
but a connection to what has happened in my own life
to what is happening now,
and I view it all as a healthy skeptic,
always looking for a logical explanation,
but the data speaks for itself,
and when I did have a very close sighting
two years before the mass sighting,
on the eve of my birthday, and I did get pictures of it,
I couldn't be here now if I didn't,
it really set that feeling in motion.
Is there a connection?
What happened on February 6th, 1995
is actually, my husband called me out of the bath,
one wall of our bedroom is a window
and we have a panoramic view,
if we're standing anywhere in our bedroom,
of the city skyline,
so we're very familiar with what planes and helicopters
and street lights and car lights look like and so forth,
and he not only is a physician
but also on several state and medical boards at the time,
not one to be ruffled, and he sounded alarmed.
He said, "Get over here, quick,"
and I grabbed a towel and ran over to the window
and a little below us
'cause we're pretty high on the mountain,
behind a private residence,
was three amber orbs
in a triangle formation, actually a pyramid,
one on top and two very closely aligned underneath,
and as soon as I saw them, it was like,
"Whoa, what is that?" and I wanted to run
and get my video camera, but it was downstairs
and I didn't know how long it would last,
so I tried to take everything in mentally,
the size, the shape, the color.
They were about three to six feet each,
and they were oval-shaped, like an egg on its side,
and the color within each orb was very different
than any other amber color I had ever seen.
It was uniform amber color, very mesmerizing,
very soft, it didn't glare at all.
Every other light out there glared, I noticed immediately,
and I though to myself if I don't get a picture of this,
nobody's gonna believe it, and I go running to the closet
to get my 35 millimeter that I take our beautiful sunsets,
and my husband calls me back, he says,
"Get over here, quick, one of them is disappearing,"
and as we both watched, it was just extraordinary,
it's really almost difficult to explain
but the top orb, without budging,
it didn't budge at all, I mean, this was intelligence
behind this phenomena,
started to dim but not even dimming,
it was dimming but it was getting smaller and smaller
and smaller and smaller in a mechanical way
until it was almost a dot, and then it was gone,
but it still felt like it was there.
That, it was very strange.
Interesting.
You know, did it go to another dimension,
I mean, I had no interest or knowledge in this topic at all,
so this was totally new to me,
this was fantastic, so I get down on the balcony
and immediately clicked a picture of the two lower orbs,
and noticed an eerie silence, as if time had stopped.
It was just bizarre.
I mean it was just bizarre, and as I'm watching
these two bottom orbs intently,
it felt as if something was watching me.
I didn't mention that to a soul
until after the mass sighting two years later,
but going through my mind at the time was,
"Who are you, what are you, do you know that I'm here?
"I'd love to meet you."
The next thing I remember,
the left bottom orb starting to dissipate
just like the top one had,
and I quickly shot a picture of that,
and that was the only picture that turned out at the time,
but for me, not only did it confirm
that something unusual happened and it was pretty close,
but I happened to get it in action.
I caught the bottom left orb half disappeared
and one is still there,
but I didn't even know who to show it to.
I knew no one associated with this topic at all,
so I wondered for two years, a number of things,
why I saw it on the eve of my birthday,
that's why I remember the day, actually.
This was kind of a cool birthday present.
Yeah.
Why my husband and I saw it together,
so that we could confirm that we did see something unusual,
and why I had a picture of it.
Would I ever find out what these strange,
mysterious phenomena were?
And then lo and behold, until two months
before the mass sighting, I didn't see anything.
I mean I would, like I said, if we're in our bedroom,
we see the sea, skyline and nothing
remotely familiar to that popped up.
Until two months before the mass sighting,
I was in the bedroom and I noticed,
this was January 22nd, 1997,
I noticed three orbs in a line formation,
equidistant from each other, and I thought,
whoa, they're amber but they were at a distance.
How close were the other ones?
The other ones were only a few hundred feet from our home.
OK, close.
And they've been analyzed and all that, yes,
and I thought, jeez, you know,
they're amber, they're in a formation
even though they were a line formation,
equidistant from each other,
and they're hovering for minutes,
strangely similar to '95 and I just noted as each one,
again, imploded from the outside inwards
very, very slowly.
One, two, three, from right to left and they were out.
The next night, I happened to notice the same three orbs
are now in front of South Mountain,
and I knew they were in front of South Mountain
because there's red blinking lights
to alert planes coming into the airport
which is in front of South Mountains
and north of South Mountain,
and I thought, "OK, enough,
"I've got to get my video camera,"
so I ran downstairs, grabbed it,
got out to the pool area and got about 18 seconds' worth,
the battery went dead, and it was charged.
So I went in, I hooked it up,
went out, they were gone, this was about 8 o'clock.
About 8:30, my husband was coming home
from a hospital board meeting and he comes up the drive
and I went out and I said,
"You know, honey, remember I told you
"about the three amber orbs in a line last night
"to the northwest?
"Well about a half an hour ago,
"they were right in front of South Mountain,"
and as I'm pointing like this,
they reappear in the same spot.
It's like, "Whoa, I've gotta get a picture of this,"
and I have come, I have to say,
I have come to the belief,
if it is a belief,
that things happen for a reason,
and I am so thankful that my video camera
was hooked up to the (laughs)
to the electric because I ran upstairs
and got my 35 millimeter and as I got out on the balcony,
suddenly, as I'm ready to shoot the three in a row,
six lights popped on above the three.
Massive span,
equidistant from each other, it was unnerving.
I started to shake.
In fact, the first picture I took,
you can see that I was shaking
because not having had an explanation
for the phenomena two years before,
now this is so massive, I thought,
"Oh my god, is this a mother ship or a fleet,
"what is this?" but I kept clicking away
and I got six pictures in a row,
actually, of these phenomena head on,
turning into a V shape.
Oh, yes.
And it was so amazing.
Yes.
That I did not sleep well that night, and I figured,
"Come on, there's gotta be a logical explanation for this.
"I will just call around the next morning and find out
"if anybody had seen it."
Someone else must have seen this, it was massive,
and I finally called the FAA at the airport
and got air traffic controllers on the phone
who saw the same thing at the same time
and they were just as excited that I had seen them,
and in fact, they were more excited than me.
One of the fellas said, "Did you see those six lights
"that were equidistant from each other
"hovering in a formation last night about 8:30?"
I said, "Yes."
He said, "Well, there were actually three at 8 o'clock."
I said I saw them, too, and he said,
"Well, we looked on radar and they didn't show up on radar,
"so we took our binoculars."
These are high-powered binoculars to look
because it was in class B restricted airspace.
That's a very important point,
and anyone that's in that 30-mile radius
around the center of the airport must call in
to the tower to let them know they're gonna be flying,
especially a thousand feet altitude as this was,
but no one called in.
So they took the binoculars to look and in his own words,
he said there were six points of light,
totally equidistant from each other,
massive span, over a mile wide,
that started turning against the wind,
and this particular air traffic controller
was a meteorologist, he knew what he was talking about,
and then slowly in tandem, in synchrony,
as if it was attached to something
but they couldn't quite see what it was attached to,
moved slowly behind South Mountain,
so I said, "So what was it?"
and there was silence,
and then the fella said, "Beats me,"
and I said, "Wait a minute,
"you're an air traffic controller, you're supposed to know
"what's in our airspace, especially--"
But it wasn't showing up on radar.
Wasn't showing (mumbles)
and he was just as curious and we kept in contact
and I continued to photograph these things
and what was amazing to me is that I did photograph
this phenomena straight on turning into a V
while they were seeing it, so we saw the same thing,
I mean the data really speaks for itself,
but at any rate, I continued photographing these things,
and this again is very serendipitous
because finally it was getting ridiculous.
I mean I was, every time I saw these lights pop up,
I felt compelled to document them on film as a scientist,
and eventually, when it was getting into March,
it was like, OK, I've gotta find out what this is.
There must be a logical explanation
and this is how close I was.
A friend of a friend had a neighbor
who had a friend who knew the past president of MUFON,
Mutual UFO Network!
So I called him up and I said, "Look,
"I've been seeing these orbs for weeks,"
and he said he hadn't heard about them
but there were people that not only had witnessed them
as well for days before the mass sighting,
but took video, wonderful video,
and they look like spinning balls of energy,
and I call them an orb because the light does not extend
outside the edge, it's self-contained,
like nothing you've ever seen before,
and I said I also have a picture from '95
that I know is authentic but I'd like someone of credence
to take a peek at it, and he referred me
to a MUFON field investigator.
We set up an appointment for that Wednesday,
the next week, and he calls on Tuesday to postpone
because the then state director's mom had passed.
That's where we get this connection again
and the funeral happened to be that Wednesday
and the only window of opportunity that I had
for the next couple of weeks was Friday morning
at 10 o'clock, he said fine.
Well, unbeknownst to me, Thursday night,
March 13th, there was a lot going on.
Yes.
For me, it was like an ordinary night.
Here, I see one lone light,
about 8:20, to the west, and interestingly,
at 8:20 is when the first official call came in
from a retired police officer in Paulden, Arizona,
that he had seen this massive formation
of V formation of light.
The calls were coming in
geographically as it moved.
One community that got the calls
and the next community and the next,
all the way down as it passed over.
Yes, in fact, we have a 911 police operator
who came forward recently
that just retired, and she said,
"You know, I hear they only said they got a few calls
"at the police station, but you know,"
That wasn't the case.
"I'm ready to tell the rest of the story."
And they got hundreds and hundreds of calls,
and yes, you could tell
as it was coming through Phoenix,
the reports were just spectacular,
but anyway, at 8:20, it was the first report,
and also at 8:20, interestingly,
there was a call to the UFO Reporting Center
of Peter Davenport in Seattle about 3 AM the next morning
from an alleged crewman from Luke Air Force Base
who reported in great detail,
and it was recorded and we have it in our documentary
and it's also mentioned in the book,
that there was an object,
a mile-wide craft,
hovering over the center of Phoenix,
7th Avenue and Indian School,
and military jets were sent out
to either intercept it or take on camera film
and there were witnesses to confirm this,
and as it got close, the object blinked out,
and freaked out, actually, one of the pilots
the crewman said he helped out of his craft
when he got back to Luke Air Force Base
and Luke was shut down.
And we do have a military fella in the documentary
that talks about this, but anyway--
Interesting considering it was deemed
at that time to be military illumination flares.
Well, not yet, not yet.
(Voiceover laughs)
That's a very interest--
A little later.
Oh yeah, oh yeah.
For flares, interesting phenomena for flares.
Well, not only that, and obviously,
we're talking craft here, which has never been addressed,
OK,
but this was all about 8:20,
so that's when I saw that one orb,
and I didn't jump up 'cause I had enough in the can
for the MUFON investigator the next morning,
but I noted also about 8:10, 8:15,
one lone orb far south,
which was interesting because that's when
witnesses were seeing this massive array of lights
in Tucson, which is about two hours south of Phoenix,
so that computes.
Well, about 10 o'clock, the news was just about to start.
They were doing the promos for the news.
Suddenly, I see these six lights pop up again
in the same exact location as January 23rd,
and grab my camera, I get out there.
By the time I got out there, three had disappeared
and what I got on film,
which has become one of the signature videos
of the mass sighting, are three points of light
that seem to be the end points
of the massive triangle or V-shaped craft,
which people would describe throughout the state as well.
Some people saw a number of different orbs
on these craft ranging from three
to nine, and other people would see
these orbs detach from the main object
to go out into the environment and then re-dock with it,
which is interesting because if you do go back
to my '95 photos, and I did find additional photos,
you will see from the first to the last photo
that the same exact phenomena is in the same exact location
in the distance in those pictures as well,
disappearing, as closed orbs were disappearing,
so these phenomena have been around for a while
and another serendipitous situation
is six months before the mass sighting,
I was invited to present
my substance abuse prevention education program
at the Gila River Indian Reservation School,
they have one school there,
and they really don't talk to outsiders much
but I did befriend some of the teachers and the principal,
and after the mass sighting,
because my pictures seemed to indicate
between the '95 pictures and the pictures I took two months
before the mass sighting and during the mass sighting,
that these phenomena are appearing near
where South Mountain
and the Estrella Mountain range intersect,
and that's the base and in between
is where the Gila River Indian Reservation is,
so I called them up and I said, "Did you,
"by chance, see any strange lights on March 13th?"
and they started to giggle, and I said, "Is that funny?"
and they said, "Are you kidding?
"We've been looking up at them for centuries.
"We call them Sky People."
Light beings, it's part of their culture.
I had no idea.
Yes.
That blew me away.
I mean, not only indigenous peoples here,
but worldwide, believed that there are other intelligences
and these orbs are spirit world.
It's found in their ancient cave art.
Absolutely, absolutely,
and the orbs are our spirit world,
many of them believe, coming to give them guidance
and inspiration and comfort.
So that was really, really interesting
when I heard--
'Cause you didn't know that at the time,
so you were a virgin to all of this.
I have, knew nothing about these these phenomena
so the more I started to investigate, actually,
after the mass sighting,
because I happened to walk in the next morning
to the MUFON investigator's home,
with video in hand from the night before.
I had no idea that this was happening statewide.
To me, it was just very similar to what I had seen
in January,
and the first thing he says to me is
"Did you see the mass sighting last night?"
and I said, "Well, I saw something similar
"til a couple months ago."
He said, "No, no, no, you don't understand.
"Hundreds, if not thousands, of people,
"saw these massive arrays of lights, V-shaped lights,
"over a mile to two miles wide,"
in some reports, by the way, or craft,
and NBC was coming to interview him in a half an hour.
I said, "Whoa, I'm outta here."
I said, first of all, I don't know what we're dealing with,
whether it's military or a hoax or whatever,
and I did health reporting for NBC
here in the early 80s and I said they might recognize me.
Yeah.
I'm outta here, but this isn't about me.
This is about the data so please take a copy of the footage
from last night and share it with whoever you would like
and I'm happy to talk with them over the phone,
which I did, the rest of the day,
I was getting calls all day and by 4:30 in the afternoon,
my video was plastered on every news station.
It was unbelievable, it was really exciting
because here I had been documenting these things
for so long, and now thousands of people
had seen what I had seen.
By 9 o'clock that night, there were a couple other videos
that came out that were even more spectacular than mine.
One is in a V-shape like an arrowhead with five lights
that was taken a little before my video was taken,
before 10 o'clock, and...
It is spectacular, you know, you just look at the data.
Those lights are attached to something,
and then, after 10 o'clock,
there were a couple videos of boomerang-shaped objects,
huge boomerangs,
and I thought, "Whoa, now thousands of people have seen
"what I have seen, something's going on here."
As not only a scientist, but as an educator,
and certainly as an experiencer,
I wanted to get to the bottom of it,
and I started keeping a journal,
a very intricate, meticulous journal
of everything that happened
from witness reports to media reports,
to really going out of my way to have my data analyzed.
I went to the University of Arizona,
Optical Science Department, Consciousness Study Department,
Arizona State University, Geology, Anthropology,
Mathematics, Astronomy departments,
as well as the Brooks Institute of Photography
in Santa Barbara, and across the board,
no one could give me an explanation
for what I had documented.
If anything, they were fascinated,
and really, it was--
So was that the kickoff then?
I mean, you devoted years looking into the phenomena
after that, and of course, you've written a book,
you did a wonderful documentary, and--
Well, what happened
was that I pushed my entire professional life aside
for four years, searching for a logical source
and meaning for what I had witnessed and photographed.
I have yet to find anything.
My meticulous inquiry really opened up a whole new world
to me that I had no idea existed
from the history of these phenomena,
from the cave drawings
and primitive prehistory caves of these objects.
How did people know in those days
what they would look like, that look like objects now?
As well as the 15th and 16th century,
with frescoes and so forth,
and have people actually looking up at the sky.
Yeah, Renaissance UFOs, yeah.
Exactly.
To even the World War II to the Foo Fighters,
which are identical, identical.
I've conversed with Dr. Richard Haines,
who has studied quite extensively,
pilot sightings and these orbs that were seen
during World War II flying around the different aircraft
in twos or threes, just like what my husband and I saw,
and each side thought the other side had
this advanced spy technology,
and it wasn't until after World War II
that everyone found out no one has this spy technology.
Right.
Not only that, these orbs have certainly been seen
above nuclear bases.
There's a wonderful story--
That's a common thing, is they show up
around nuclear facilities globally, yes,
and that has been going on for decades.
And I have to say because from my own view,
and I'm not saying everything's benevolent by any means,
but not only from what happened here in Arizona,
which was a very gentle non-threatening visit,
but when you look at the data
and see what has happened worldwide
for many decades with these orbs,
and that they're flying around nuclear bases,
or nuclear silos, and the destruction
that could have occurred.
Certainly, their advanced technology--
And there are times they did interface,
where they would actually shut down the silos and--
That happened in Montana in the 1960,
actually it was in March 16th, 1967,
and our mass, 30 years, March 13th, 1997.
And they did, and that was taken,
I mean, they certainly took exception.
The military took exception to that,
thinking something else from the outside could interfere
and immediately interpreted that as a threat,
of course, which we have to build up against,
but what you say is more fundamentally true.
This has been happening for, well, forever actually,
thousands of years--
Everybody comes from a different background,
from a different upbringing, from a different belief system,
and it's going to take some people longer than others
for this to sink in, and in fact, there's many people
that can't deal with it or don't want to deal with it
and that's OK.
That's OK, everyone in their own time,
but the data is there if they want to look at it.
The data's absolutely there,
and but what did it do to you and your life?
I mean you have something coming up
that I think is very exciting
because understanding who we are,
who our neighbors in the cosmos are,
what these phenomena are should be a part
of our education.
It should be passed on through families,
through schools, and so forth,
and let's talk about, after that time leading up
to what you're getting ready to do right now,
how you took it on personally
and how you interpreted this and what you feel
should be shared and how.
Well not only was it bizarre that after the mass sighting,
there was no investigation, there was no explanation.
The elected officials, for the most part,
said, "What? Something happened on March 13?"
and it was just very frustrating for the witnesses
that had had this massive craft, this massive phenomena
right over their heads, looked into these,
what they would call canisters of light,
and some people said that they, it was,
they could throw a stone at it, it was that close.
Silent, just gliding,
and some people did see it take off at a tremendous speed,
I have to add that.
Incredible technology, to be sure, there was not a sound,
and even when the object took off at a miraculous speed,
there was no sonic boom.
I mean we're talking incredible technology here.
An official silence.
Official silence
until--
The government
did come out. (laughs)
Until, no, we're getting ahead of ourselves,
until there was a big article,
front page article
in USA Today, June 18th, 1997,
months later,
opening up the sighting to international scrutiny.
We were deluged by media from all over the world,
and once they started talking to the witnesses as I had,
their stories were so detailed and so heartfelt,
something really special, extraordinary happened here,
they too were saying, "Why isn't there an investigation?
"Why isn't there an explanation?"
and very interestingly, the next day,
June 19th,
the former governor, Fife Symington,
called a press conference,
saying that they had found the culprit,
and everybody took it quite seriously,
and here he marches out one of his aides
in a big alien head costume and really mocked the sighting.
I remember that.
And offended many people, I have to say,
especially many people with their children,
either playing baseball or going to the mall,
and they knew what they saw
was real,
and here they were blowing it off and making a joke of it.
A few weeks later,
actually, July 24th,
and I had really tried to do my homework across the board,
not only with my own data,
but also calling every military base,
and I do have some of those comical conversations in my book
because they were just as curious.
Some of them were embarrassed
that they didn't know what it was,
and suddenly, I get a call from the head
of the PR at the Air National Guard, and she says,
"Dr. Lynne, I think we know what those lights were
"back in March," and I was thrilled.
I thought, "Great, finally I'm gonna find out
"what they were," and she says, "Do you believe
"that nobody ever looked at the log
"for visiting Air National Guard
"and Maryland Air National Guard was in town
"sending off flares, so that must be
"what some people saw in Operation Snowbird,"
and I said, "Well, wait a minute, first of all,
"you're trying to tell me that what we saw were flares."
I said, "You know, when were they in town?"
and she said from March 1st to March 15th,
I said, "Were they in town in January?"
She says, "Oh no, definitely not."
I said, "Well, I have 35 millimeter photographs
"of the same exact exact phenomena
"in the same exact location, in class B airspace,
"two months before the mass sighting."
She said, "You never told me that,"
and then I said, "Besides that,"
I said, "You're trying to say that flares,"
that I, by then I had educated myself
to any logical explanation,
and flares drift and drop with the wind haphazardly.
They have huge smoke trails that are illuminated
by the flare itself, it's an illumination flare
that they were saying they deployed,
well, to best illuminate,
nobody, no one, described the phenomena like that,
and I said, "And you're trying to tell me
"that flares that cannot keep a formation,
"traversed the entire state for hours in a V array?"
and she says, "Oh, oh, I have a call coming in,
"I'll get back to you."
Well I'm still waiting, it's 14 years. (laughs)
So at that point, it really started to sink in
that whoa, you know, something's going on here,
and from that day on,
not only did they push the flare theory
and they've never,
ever addressed the craft phenomena,
but many people were asking for a reenactment.
OK, and I was open.
Fine, if it's military, and I knew I had pictures
from '95 that had the same phenomena,
from '97 that was confirmed by your traffic controllers
in class B restricted airspace, and the same location
during the mass sighting as well.
So whoever did this, did it at least three times,
do it again.
Well, we waited and we waited, and finally,
right before the third anniversary,
there was a big announcement that three Air National Guards
were coming into town, California, New York and Michigan,
I believe, to hold deployment
to show everyone the Phoenix Lights.
They were flares.
Great, OK.
Well, everyone was ready for them, including the media,
and I have to say again, the data speaks for itself,
all you have to do is look at it.
Wasn't the same experience.
Significantly different.
Yeah.
From the real deal,
and that really convinced me more than anything
that hey, the military had their shot.
This was the only explanation
that they ever came up with, OK?
And I know what I saw up close and personal
was definitely not flares.
In fact, the point that we lived kind of nestled
in the mountain range and it was so close
over a treacherous gated community,
there's no way it was military,
so, and with all the other data,
it just points to something unknown.
So you went on your journey,
put everything aside and you studied, studied, studied,
and you've produced these beautiful works,
and I wanna know, for you personally,
what you've come to with it.
Well, what happened was that after the four years,
I ended up with a 750-page journal of incredible data,
not only the history, but similar sightings
that have happened worldwide for many decades.
I mean we're talking Lubbock Lights and
the Hudson Valley sightings, and Belgium,
which was an amazing set of circumstances
because they actually joined forces with
the community and university and military,
which is a stunning example of what should happen.
Right.
As well as UK and Russia.
In fact, one month, one month before the mass sighting
on February 19th, 1997, there was a mass sighting
in St. Petersburg, Russia, and a couple people
actually got video, which is stunning
in the first place, and in the second place,
it's very similar to one of the craft that people saw here,
that we now have gracing the cover of our new DVD,
The Phoenix Lights: Beyond Top Secret.
What happened at that point is that I did go back to work
to help put our younger son through medical school,
and as a chief clinical consultant
at the Arizona Heart Institute Wellness and Imaging Center,
while I pared down the best of what I found,
and I was anonymous for seven years and I still,
at the point, didn't know if I wanted
to come forward with the data,
but it was so overwhelming, and I continued
to take photographs of these phenomena
that in good conscience, as an educator,
and I've been educating the community for over 30 years
on the reality of vital health issues,
I have a company that produces video
and workbook curriculums on AIDS and teen pregnancy
and substance abuse, to help wake up youth,
particularly, to the reality of different health issues,
how could I not, as an educator,
share the reality of this vital issue,
and I finally decided to come forward,
pared down the book to 230 pages
of the best information that I had
gathered.
And you've done
a wonderful job.
Thank you, thank you very much.
It was a rough, rough few years because
I really didn't know if I should come forward.
I mean it's such a precarious topic and controversial,
but you know what, it is what it is.
I'm just sharing the data
and people can make up their own minds.
I'm not saying, what I have never said, what it is.
I don't know what it is, but I know that it is,
and it's time we get this out in the open
and address it, accept it, and study it,
so we can move forward.
So you're literally looking to take it
to the classroom.
Well, what happened was that after I came out
with the book, I was invited,
after Barnes & Nobles and Borders told
to actually present the case
at a local school here,
which was amazing in and of itself.
The parents had gotten out together
and I was so honored
to walk into 200 middle school students
that were sitting on the edge of their chairs.
They thirst for this.
Absolutely.
They thirst for this knowledge.
There is nothing, and that's when I realized
that I really had to do something.
The could've been doing algebra. (laughs)
Well it was the last period of the day,
and the teachers were amazed, too,
that you could hear a pin drop,
and I realized that, jeez, I mean I really needed
to get something out there visually,
and that's when I decided to do the documentary.
After I came out with the book in 2004,
I was approached by several filmmakers,
but I didn't have any time.
I was working 7 to 7 and radio programs into the night
and Borders and Barnes & Noble tour on the weekends,
but after I saw those kids and realized that, whoa,
I mean there is nothing,
nothing in our history books about this topic,
I had to get something out there visually
and that's when I started doing the documentary
and by the summer, it became quite apparent
that I had to make a decision.
I couldn't do everything and
I was well on the way to producing the documentary
and getting incredible interviews from military and pilots
and witnesses and so forth,
that I decided to leave the Arizona Heart Institute
and to take this road,
and finish the documentary.
We've won over a dozen international film festival awards.
We're really proud but the main thing is,
and the book and documentary really complement each other,
is now, I really feel, is imperative
to get something into the classroom,
and I'm working with some wonderful educators, the--
Hear, hear, this will be the first, too.
Oh yes, oh yes.
This I'm excited about, this is fabulous.
Yes, my other programs are being distributed
by Discovery Education and
hopefully, this will also open the door
in public schools, and already, in charter schools,
they're already showing my documentary, reading my book,
which is thrilling to me.
I mean this is what I'm about, that's my passion.
That's your, that's the piece of the pie
that you carry, is that you were given the heads up,
for reasons you may never know,
to be ready and standing by with your camera charged
and ready for the phenomena when it showed,
documenting it all the way through,
having the fortitude, the discipline and the intelligence
to be able to pull it together in terms of your book,
your documentary, and do exactly what you're doing now,
which is, no one has succeeded in doing that,
probably, very few, if anyone has even tried.
That's a testament to your own strength and will
and energy to follow this all the way through
because we can't relegate this
to a giggle factor any longer.
Well that was one of the reasons that I came forward.
I mean there were a few reasons that I came forward,
one of which, our younger son who is now a neurologist,
and he also had a couple sightings of the Phoenix Lights,
was the only one that read the 750-page journal.
He happened to be home for a couple weeks
and he looked at me and he said,
"Mom, you have to do this.
"This is too important not to share,
"and everything you've done has led up to this."
Yes.
It was like, whoa, you know, from the mouth of babes.
I really, that really hit home
because if I could lend my expertise,
my unique expertise and credibility
so that people actually look at the data,
and that's why I came forward.
Yes.
I knew if I didn't come forward,
it was gonna sit on a shelf.
So what should we look for,
within the education framework of this?
Are you dealing with schools directly
to put it in curriculum in public, private?
We're just at the fundamental
gathering and development right now.
I'm working with a wonderful
senior math professor at ASU,
Dr. Al Swimmer, who is very into the crop circle phenomena,
and when you really look at that data,
it is breathtaking,
not only in the formations themselves,
but in the mathematical integrity
in the crop circles themselves,
the geometry and so forth,
and we are actually gonna be taking
one of the, the one,
crop circle that he handed me of three orbs
that was dissected by an equilateral triangle,
and you would not believe how many equilateral triangles
are in this one crop circle,
it blew him away when he really started working on it,
so that we can introduce crop circles to youth,
and I'm actually working from grade school and up
to do this for kids at each level,
and certainly, we'll start out simple
and it'll be an overview.
We're not trying to convince anybody of anything,
it's just the data, and they can make,
they can decide for themselves,
but where crop circles are concerned,
certainly we want to introduce the phenomena itself,
and the history of the phenomena,
and what real crop circles
show us,
not only in their beauty,
but also in the mathematical end of things,
as well as history.
There certainly is a vast history of this phenomena,
again, that has never been in the history books.
No,
and no doubt, I would guess this will be
a universal favorite course,
when this makes it into the system.
We're gonna work very hard,
well I'm gonna work very hard--
And it speaks to people on a different level.
Yes.
It's telling them something
that they feel an inherent connection with
or there wouldn't be the intrigue.
Absolutely, but not only that,
there's so much more.
I mean the science of it.
There are terms, there are scientific
data that is so fascinating
that quantum physics and quantum mechanics
is now starting to catch up with the possibility
of different dimensions,
of different times and spaces along with art,
and I share something in my new book
that I had never thought I would share before
concerning my '95 closed photographs
that was discovered by Dr. Bruce Maccabee,
between the first and the last picture
that is really photographic evidence,
the first authenticated photographic evidence ever
of missing time, and that's a whole story in itself.
It is, indeed.
What's the name of that book?
That's in my book now.
Oh, I thought you said a new one coming up.
Well I actually came forward.
Yes.
Last year, the publisher, Hampton Roads,
asked me to do a new book of an update since 2004,
and I have to say, the first book not only is so jam-packed
with so many important
events and data and information and so forth
that I thought it was really important for people
to read that and to be educated to that material,
so I added a section on what has happened
since I came forward in 2004,
and that is included in there as well,
and certainly our website, ThePhoenixLights.net.
ThePhoenixLights.net has the full report, 21-page report,
by Dr. Bruce Maccabee, which I applaud him.
I didn't find it.
If it wasn't for him, I would have not,
had no idea this data was here,
but I did keep it private for over a dozen years
because it was so bizarre,
but now I'm sharing it for the first time.
The other part of the curriculum
that is really important is not only critical thinking
and to get used to start really considering
the possibility of us not being alone in the universe,
of the possibility
that there are other intelligences
that are out there.
What if there were?
What would happen?
Get them thinking, what would happen
to change our life on earth,
and our perception and our world view,
as well as conflict resolution.
If we can't really
end our conflicts between ourselves,
how are we going to have a peaceful relationship
to other intelligences,
so that's gonna be all part of this as well,
so we're trying to do a whole overview of the topic,
as well as to really just get kids
to start thinking about this, and young people
to really start considering the possibilities,
so that they, if they're curious and if they wish to,
can look further because there's a plethora,
a plethora of information out there once you start looking,
and that's credible.
Certainly, there's lots out there that's not,
but there is an abundance and more and more,
and now certainly, with the internet,
which is showing things at record speed,
and in real time, I just got a notification
in real time
as someone was having a sighting the night before last,
in Florida, in Orlando,
saying, "Does anybody around me see this?"
and we've even talked about
possibly getting a reporting center in real time
so that people can report the sightings
and we can keep track and those around the area
can also take note, so now, people with their cellphones
and cameras and so forth are capturing these things
around the world.
It cannot be explained or denied,
and I have to add this, too.
I mean there are,
when you look at the fact that our one solar system
is a very young solar system.
Our one galaxy, our Milky Way galaxy,
and there could be trillions out there,
is 14 to 16 billion years old.
Our solar system is a very young solar system.
It's only four to six billion years old.
There are scientists now postulating
that there could be intelligent, sentient beings out there,
billions.
Let's assume.
Billions of years ahead of us,
and NASA just came forward recently to say
that they have found microbes now
that are living beyond any comprehension
of, on arsenic, rather than phosphorus
and other amino acids,
which shows us that life is viable anywhere,
and we're seeing that just on earth.
From the hot springs of Yellowstone
to the frozen Arctic, so--
I think it would be, to me,
it seems almost insane to assume otherwise, actually.
It's hard to track back what kind of belief systems
and dogma would have ever created a mindset
that we were somehow alone in this universe,
and so the fact that people like you are coming forward
and saying, "We can't ignore it any longer,
"we gotta look at this," yeah, I totally congratulate you
for what you've done so far and applaud you
for what you're getting ready to do,
and I appreciate your taking the time to do this with us.
I appreciate you appreciating that
because, look, it took 17 centuries
for human beings to realize that there are zillions
of tiny organisms all around us, even in our bodies.
Some are beneficial, some are pathogens.
We've learned to live with it,
and just in the past few decades,
we've learned that there's electromagnetic energies
around every living cell.
Well just because we can't see these tiny living entities,
or electromagnetic energies, or gamma rays or radio waves,
whatever, it doesn't mean they're not real.
Right.
We may just be looking on the AM dial
for the, an FM frequency,
so it's time we do get this out in the open
and even if we don't have the technology
to definitively define what these things are yet,
it doesn't mean they're not real.
That's right.
So it's time we talk about it and we study it,
and so we can move on in our own evolution.
Not only find out who's driving these things,
but also raise our consciousness
and evolve to a new place.
I think we're right on that precipice.
We're really getting ready to do that,
and one of the things
that I thought was really important
to express in the book,
and now in my speaking engagements,
is the fact that whoever is doing this,
whoever, and I don't know who's doing this.
Certainly, it could be spirit world,
it could be intergalactic, intragalactic,
time travelers, whoever.
It doesn't matter.
Whoever is doing this is not only intelligent
but certainly, they're trying to wake us up
not only to their presence,
but also to the spiritual beings that we are.
Yes.
That we have lost the connection to the source,
and to the positiveness that we can be.
We live in such a beautiful, beautiful planet.
We are so fortunate and so blessed
that we are here, especially in this time in history,
that instead of appreciating that, unfortunately,
many people aren't awake to that yet,
but more and more people are becoming awake
and enlightened, and as I mentioned earlier,
these phenomena, whether it's near-death experience,
out of body, or unexplained aerial phenomena,
are waking people up to that,
and I applaud them and I applaud the people
that really take note and that are open.
That's the first step, to be open to the possibilities,
the wondrous possibilities of the universe,
and I thank you for doing this because it's important,
and that's one of the other reasons
that I came forward as a physician,
to let people know they're not alone.
That whatever their experience,
if it's real to them, and most things can be explained,
but a small percentage cannot.
And again, just because we don't have the technology yet
to definitively define what those things are,
it doesn't mean they're not real,
and they affect people at a very, very deep level,
so you know,
one of the major reasons that I came forward
is to let people know that it's OK,
it's important to talk about it.
Even if it's just to one other person,
it's healing, it's cathartic.
Yes.
And that they're not alone.
Well thank you for talking
to millions of people.
Lynne's book and documentary take the viewer step by step
through the event as it unfolded,
and was later covered up.
You can find both on her website
at ThePhoenixLights.net.
To explore further down this avenue,
you might also enjoy our latest interview
with Stephen Bassett,
and our interviews with Robert Dean and Clifford Stone.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.
(mysterious instrumental music)